Sit rep 2020 03 27 (#276)
nextstrain/ncov: narratives/ncov_sit-rep_2020-03-27.md

---
title: Genomic analysis of COVID-19 spread. Situation report 2020-03-27.
authors:
  - Sidney M. Bell
  - Nicola Müller
  - Emma Hodcroft
  - Cassia Wagner
  - Misja Ilcisin
  - James Hadfield
  - Richard Neher
  - Trevor Bedford
authorLinks:
  - https://twitter.com/sidneymbell
  - https://bedford.io/team/nicola-mueller/
  - https://neherlab.org/emma-hodcroft.html
  - https://bedford.io/team/cassia-wagner/
  - https://bedford.io/team/misja-ilcisin/
  - https://bedford.io/team/james-hadfield/
  - https://neherlab.org/richard-neher.html
  - https://bedford.io/team/trevor-bedford/
affiliations: "Fred Hutch, Seattle, USA; Biozentrum, Basel, Switzerland; CZI, CA, USA"
translators:
translatorLinks:
date: "2020 March 27"
dataset: "https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map"
abstract: "This report uses publicly shared genomic data to track the spread of COVID-19. These reports are updated weekly."
---

> <!-- Translators: Only text after : in the above ^ needs to be translated -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- Translators: Only text after : in the above ^ needs to be translated. Please add your name under translators and a link to your professional webpage (can be twitter) under translatorLinks. -->
```

<!-- Comment tags like these do not need to be translated, they are only to help you! -->
<!-- Ensure that links always end in a 'letter' (. counts) If some kind of text doesn't follow them, it breaks the slide. -->

> <!-- numbers can be tagged ilke this: 161</tag> - this is just for us to help find them to update! Just leave in the </tag> bit. -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<!-- This is left-side text 1-->
# [Table of Contents](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&p=grid)

* [Background resources](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=2).     
* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=7).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=11).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=13).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=15).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=17).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  
* [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=20).  
<!-- This is right-side text -->
```auspiceMainDisplayMarkdown
# Executive summary

> We analyzed 1,495 publicly shared COVID-19 genomes. By comparing these viral genomes to each other, we can characterize how COVID-19 is evolving and moving around the world. In this week's updates, we report:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We analyzed 1,495 publicly shared COVID-19 genomes. By comparing these viral genomes to each other, we can characterize how COVID-19 is moving around the world and spread locally. In this week's updates, we report:
```

**Europe**  

> * We continue to see co-mingling of samples across Europe, suggesting that the virus has continued to move across borders in the last 3-5 weeks. As mitigation measures have time to take effect, we may hope to see more clustering of cases by country.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We continue to see strong mixing of samples across Europe, suggesting that the virus has continued to move across borders in the last 3-5 weeks. As mitigation measures have time to take effect, we may hope to see more clustering of cases by country.
```

> * The North American and European outbreaks are deeply intertwined, with likely transmission in both directions.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The North American and European outbreaks are deeply intertwined, but show stronger geographic clustering than, for example, within european samples.  
```

**North America**   

> * Within the U.S., transmission patterns are complex, with samples collected from opposite sides of the country still showing close relationships.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Within the U.S., the transmission patterns are complex, with samples collected from opposite sides of the country showing close relationships.
```

> * Washington state has had at least two independent introductions (the first likely from China, the second likely from Europe), which have led to two separate transmission chains.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Washington state has had at least two independent introductions (the first likely from China, the second likely from Europe) that have led to two separate transmission chains.
```

> * Evidence for likely local transmission within several states, most clearly within California.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* There is evidence for likely local transmission within several states, most clearly within California.
```

**Central and South America**

> * We received new sequences from South America this week, but sampling remains sparse; there may be more COVID activity in this region than is captured in the available data, but we can't say for sure.

Author: As many edits as you have time for are great! Super appreciated.

**Asia**  
* Preliminary evidence for a possible second transmission chain circulating within Iran.

**Africa**  
* Evidence for likely local transmission within Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo, for the last 11+ days.

> * We received new sequences from Africa this week, but sampling remains sparse; there may be much more COVID activity in this region than is captured in the available data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We received new sequences from Africa this week, but sampling remains sparse. There may be much more COVID activity in this region than is captured in the available data.
```

**Oceania**

> * Evidence for likely local transmission in New South Wales, Australia.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* there is evidence in the genetic data for local transmission in New South Wales, Australia.
```

```

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 2-->
# [COVID-19 Resources](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27)

> We've prepared some resources that are worth reading to familiarize yourself with COVID-19 and the virus that causes it, SARS-CoV-2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've prepared some resources that are worth reading to familiarize yourself with COVID-19 and the virus that causes it, SARS-CoV-2, also known as hCov-19.
```
Since we use hCov-19 in the text opposite. It might be adding this.

#### [How to read a phylogeny](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/trees-background/).  

#### [Background on coronaviruses](https://nextstrain.org/help/coronavirus/human-CoV).

#### [Background on the current hCoV-19 outbreak](https://nextstrain.org/help/coronavirus/SARS-CoV-2).

#### [Sampling: why aren't you covering the situation in country X?](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-20?n=3).

#### [FAQs](https://nextstrain.org/help/coronavirus/FAQ).

#### [Common misconceptions](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-13?n=11).
<br><br>

## External Resources  

#### [WHO Situation Reports](https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports).

#### [CDC Resources](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html).

#### [The NYTimes COVID-19 coverage](https://www.nytimes.com/news-event/coronavirus).

#### [Our World in Data](https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus).

#### [Ask a Scientist & FAQs](https://covid19.fas.org/l/en).

```

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 3-->
# [A note on sampling](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?c=country&r=country&d=map&p=grid&legend=closed)

> We currently have sequences from samples taken in 48 countries across 6 continents. This is an incredible feat -- sequencing an unknown, large RNA virus in the midst of a pandemic is difficult, and is only possible through the incredible work and timely sharing of data by scientists and physicians around the world.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We currently have sequences from viral isolates taken in 48 countries across 6 continents. This is an incredible achievement -- sequencing an unknown, large RNA virus in the midst of a pandemic is difficult, and is only possible through the incredible work and timely sharing of data by scientists and physicians around the world.
```

<br><br>

> While this data enables us to infer many useful characteristics of the outbreak and track its spread in real time, it's important to emphasize that our conclusions are limited by the available data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this data enables us to infer many useful characteristics of the outbreak and track its spread in real time, it's important to emphasize that our conclusions are limited by the available data. Additionally, the inferences from these data are subject to uncertainties.
```

* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=7).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=11).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=13).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=15).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=17).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  
* [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=20).  

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 5-->
# [Continued spread across borders in the last 3-5 weeks](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?c=country&d=tree,map&dmin=2020-03-06&f_region=Europe&p=full&r=country&legend=closed)

> Here, we show samples collected across Europe in the last 3 weeks, colored by country.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, we show samples collected across Europe in the last 3 weeks, colored by country they were isolated in.
```

> Notably, while there are some small clusters that are country-specific, there is also a great deal of intermingling by country.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notably, while there are some small clusters that are country-specific, there is also a great deal of mixing between isolates from different countries.
```

> Notably, while there are some small clusters that are country-specific, there is also a great deal of intermingling by country.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notably, some small clusters are country-specific, there is also a great deal of intermingling among countries.
```

<br><br>
This suggests that there has been continued spread across borders within the last 3-5 weeks.
<br><br>

> As the recent mitigation efforts have time to take effect, we will surveil to see if cases start to cluster more discretely by country.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This geographic clustering might become stronger with recent mitigation efforts that curtail travel between regions.
```

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 6-->
# [European and U.S. outbreaks are intertwined](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?c=region&d=tree,map&f_region=Europe,North%20America&label=clade:A2a&m=div&p=full&legend=open)

> Across the tree, we also see lots of comingling of European and American samples, indicating that the origins of the U.S. and European outbreaks are deeply intertwined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Across the tree, we also see lots of co-mingling of European and American samples, indicating that the origins of the U.S. and European outbreaks are deeply intertwined.
```

> Across the tree, we also see lots of comingling of European and American samples, indicating that the origins of the U.S. and European outbreaks are deeply intertwined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Across the tree, we also see lots of mixing of European and American samples, indicating several  separate introductions of COVID-19.
```

<br><br>

> Artificially, this may appear to flow primarily from Europe to the U.S., rather than bidirectionally; however, we expect that this is mostly an effect of sampling bias as we currently have more data from Europe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Artificially, this may appear to flow primarily from Europe to the U.S., rather than bidirectionally; however, we expect that this is mostly an effect of sampling bias as we currently have more data from Europe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Artificially, this may appear to flow primarily from Europe to the U.S., rather than bidirectionally. However, we expect this is mostly an effect of sampling bias as we currently have more data from Europe.
```

* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=7).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=11).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=13).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=15).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=17).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  
* [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=20).  

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 8-->
# [Transmission across the U.S. is complex and not well-understood](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_division=Connecticut,Washington&label=clade:B1&m=div&p=full)

Even within the U.S., transmission patterns are highly complex.
<br><br>

> For example, recent samples from the Grubaugh lab in Connecticut are both ancestral to and intermingled with samples from Washington state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, recent samples from Connecticut show strong mixing with samples from Washington state.
```

Reviewer 2: We didn't specifically name groups so far in the narratives, would leave it like this. Otherwise, we should do that for all the sequences.

While more data is needed to draw firm conclusions, this suggests that there has been recent transmission between even very distant parts of the country.
<br><br>

> This highlights that the transmission patterns across the U.S. are far more complex than is represented in the currently available data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This suggest complex transmission patterns within the United States.
```

> Additional data will help us understand what is likely a deeply interconnected national epidemic playing out amidst highly heterogeneous responses across states.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additional data will help us understand how outbreaks in different areas of the country are connected.
```

> Additional data will help us understand what is likely a deeply interconnected national epidemic playing out amidst highly heterogeneous responses across states.

Reviewer: I really love this sentence! But it's language is not simple, and may be challenging for lay readers. I've tried to clarify, but likely did not succeed. 
```suggestion
Additional data will help us understand what is likely a deeply interconnected national epidemic playing out against the backdrop of highly heterogeneous responses from states.
```

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 9-->
# [Multiple transmission chains circulating in Washington state](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_country=USA&f_division=Washington&p=full&r=location)

> Looking at all the cases in Washington state, we see that they form two clear clusters on the tree.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Looking at the cases in Washington state, we see that there are are at least to separate local outbreak clusters.
```

<br><br>

> However, the two clusters have different origins: the first cluster is most closely related to samples from China, while the second is most closely related to samples from Europe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the two clusters have different origins: the first cluster is most closely related to samples from China, while the second is most closely related to samples from Europe.
These lineages might, however, not have been introduced directly to Washington State and there may have been regions in between.
```

<br><br>

> This shows that there have been at least two separate introductions leading to independent local transmission chains.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 10-->
# [Likely two local transmission chains in California](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?branchLabel=clade&c=location&f_country=USA&f_division=California&label=clade:A7&p=full&r=location&m=div)

We see similar patterns elsewhere in the U.S.
<br><br>

> Here, we see several samples from Solano County, California, that are sampled on two different dates but very closely related to one another.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, we see several samples from Solano County in northern California, that are sampled on different dates but very closely related to one another.
```

> Here, we see several samples from Solano County, California, that are sampled on two different dates but very closely related to one another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we see several samples from Solano County, California, that are sampled on two different dates but are very closely related to one another.
```

<br><br>

> While the available data from California is too limited to make firm conclusions, this preliminary evidence is consistent with local transmission within Solano County.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the available data from California is too limited to make strong conclusions, this preliminary evidence is consistent with local transmission within Solano County.
```

<br><br>

> Elsewhere in the tree, we see a similar pattern for samples in Santa Clara county.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Elsewhere in the tree, we see a similar pattern for samples isolated in Santa Clara county.
```

<br><br>

> Each county's cluster of cases is likely to due to a separate introduction, based on their relative positions in the tree.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Based on their relative positions in the tree, each county's cluster of cases is likely due to a separate introduction
```

> Each county's cluster of cases is likely to due to a separate introduction, based on their relative positions in the tree.

Reviewer: It's a little unclear what you're referring to here. Each county in the country with cases is where my brain went as a reader. Perhaps clarify that you're only referring to Solano and Santa Clara with something like this?
```suggestion
These counties' clusters of cases are likely to due to separate introductions, based on their relative positions in the tree.
```

* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=7).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=11).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=13).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=15).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=17).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  
* [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=20).  

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 12-->
# [Primarily travel-related cases sampled in South America](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?c=division_exposure&d=tree,map&f_region=Central%20America,South%20America&m=div&p=full)

> We don't have much data from South America yet; of those data, most are returned travelers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We don't have much genetic sequences data from South America yet.
Of the available data, most are from travelers that returned from Europe.
```

> We don't have much data from South America yet; of those data, most are returned travelers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don't have much data from South America yet. Of those data, most are from travelers who are returning to South America from other parts of the globe.
```
It was not clear to me from the test that our data wasn't the reverse, i.e. we had data from travelers who were exposed in South America.

<br><br>

> While there are some potentially interesting patterns starting to emerge in the non-travel-associated cases, we don't yet have enough evidence to draw conclusions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While potentially interesting patterns are starting to emerge in the non-travel-associated cases, we don't yet have enough evidence to draw conclusions.
```

* [Executive summary](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=1).
* [Background resources](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=2).     
* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=7).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=11).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=13).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=15).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=17).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  
* [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=20).  

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 14-->

> # [Possible second transmission chain within Iran](https://nextstrain.org/ncov?c=division_exposure&label=clade:A3&m=div&d=tree,map&f_division_exposure=Iran)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# [Export of COVID-19 from Iran](https://nextstrain.org/ncov?c=division_exposure&label=clade:A3&m=div&d=tree,map&f_division_exposure=Iran)
```

<!-- There is no right side text -->

We do not yet have viral genomes from Iran.
However, we do have sequences from many cases with reported travel to Iran.
<br><br>
Most of the Iranian-linked cases nest within the clade shown here.
<br><br>

> At the very bottom, we see a new sequence from a woman in Pakistan with reported travel to Iran.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most sequences with travel history to Iran group together, suggesting that a lot of the Iranian cases were (at least) initially derived from a single introduction into Iran.
```

> Interestingly, this case is an outgroup to all of the other cases that we know about from Iran.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: The sequence from Pakistan seems to be derived from earlier cases of the outbreak in Iran

<br><br>

> This is consistent with a possible second transmission chain within Iran, although more samples are needed to confirm.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ############ AFRICA ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text 15-->
# [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_region=Africa&p=grid&r=country)
<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 16-->
# [Evidence for local transmission in Kinshasa, Congo](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_country=Congo&f_region=Africa&label=clade:A2a&p=grid&r=country)

> New sequences from Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, generated by Placide Mbala-Kingebeni et al., form a group of very closely related, local cases that were sampled over several days.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The sequences from Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic show Evidence for several separate introduction events.
Additionally, some of the new sequences form a group of very closely related, local cases that were sampled over several days.
```

* [Background resources](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=2).     
* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=7).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=11).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=13).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=15).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=17).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  
* [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=20).  

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 18-->
# [Local transmission in New South Wales](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?Label=clade:A3&d=tree&f_division=New%20South%20Wales&label=clade:A3&p=full&r=location)

> New sequences from Australia provide evidence of local transmission across New South Wales.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
New sequences from Australia show evidence of local transmission across New South Wales.
```

> The virus has likely been circulating in this area since at least February 29, 2020 (the sampling date of Australia/NSW07/2020).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The virus has likely been circulating in this area since at least the end of February.
```

<!-- There is NO right-side text -->

<!-- ############ EUROPE ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text 4-->
# [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_region=Europe&p=grid&r=country&c=country)

### Navigation
* [Executive summary](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=1).
* [Background resources](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=2).     
* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=6).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=10).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=12).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=14).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=16).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=18).  

> * [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Remove TOC to help with translations

<!-- This is left-side text 6-->
# [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_region=North%20America&p=grid&r=location&legend=closed)

### Navigation
* [Executive summary](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=1).
* [Background resources](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=2).     
* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=6).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=10).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=12).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=14).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=16).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=18).  
* [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Remove TOC to help with translation

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 7-->
# [Transmission across the U.S. is complex and not well-understood](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_division=Connecticut&label=clade:B1&m=div&p=full)

Even within the U.S., transmission patterns are highly complex.
<br><br>
For example, recent samples from Connecticut are both ancestral to and intermingled with samples from Washington state.

> While more data is needed to draw firm conclusions, this suggests that there has been recent transmission between even very distant parts of the country.

Reviewer 4: transmission -> transmissions?

<br><br>
This highlights that the transmission patterns across the U.S. are far more complex than is represented in the currently available data.
Additional data will help us understand what is likely a deeply interconnected national epidemic playing out against the backdrop of highly heterogeneous responses from states.
<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 8-->
# [Multiple transmission chains circulating in Washington state](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_country=USA&f_division=Washington&p=full&r=location)

> Looking at the cases in Washington state, we see that there are are at least to separate local outbreak clusters.

Reviewer 4: dup "are are"

<br><br>
However, the two clusters have different origins: the first cluster is most closely related to samples from China, while the second is most closely related to samples from Europe. It is also possible that these introductions were indirect, with unsampled cases from a different region in between.
<br><br>
<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 10-->
# [Likely two local transmission chains in California](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?c=location&f_country=USA&f_division=California&label=clade:A7&p=full&r=location&m=div)

We see similar patterns elsewhere in the U.S.
<br><br>
Here, we see several samples from Solano County in northern California, that are sampled on different dates but very closely related to one another.
<br><br>
While the available data from California is too limited to make strong conclusions, this preliminary evidence is consistent with local transmission within Solano County.
<br><br>

> Elsewhere in the tree, we see a similar pattern for samples isolated in Santa Clara county.

Reviewer 4: Santa Clara county -> Santa Clara County

# [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_region=Central%20America,South%20America&p=grid&r=country&c=country&legend=closed)

### Navigation
* [Executive summary](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=1).
* [Background resources](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=2).     
* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=6).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=10).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=12).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=14).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=16).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=18).  
* [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Remove TOC to help with translation

<!-- This is left-side text 13-->
# [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_region=Asia&p=grid&r=country&c=country&legend=closed)

### Navigation
* [Executive summary](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=1).
* [Background resources](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=2).     
* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=6).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=10).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=12).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=14).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=16).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=18).  
* [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Remove TOC to help with translation

<!-- There is no right side text -->

<!-- ##### slide break ##### -->
<!-- This is left-side text 14-->
# [Possible second transmission chain within Iran](https://nextstrain.org/ncov?c=division_exposure&label=clade:A3&m=div&d=tree,map&f_division_exposure=Iran)
<!-- There is no right side text -->

We do not yet have viral genomes from Iran.
However, we do have sequences from many cases with reported travel to Iran.
<br><br>
Most sequences with travel history to Iran group together, suggesting that a lot of the Iranian cases were--at least initially--derived from a single introduction into Iran.
<br><br>
At the very bottom of the tree, we see a new sequence from a woman in Pakistan with reported travel to Iran.

> Interestingly, this case is an outgroup to the the other cases that we know about from Iran, but was sampled around the same time.

Reviewer 4: dup - "the the"

<!-- This is left-side text 15-->
# [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_region=Africa&p=grid&r=country)

### Navigation
* [Executive summary](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=1).
* [Background resources](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=2).     
* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=6).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=10).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=12).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=14).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=16).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=18).  
* [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Remove TOC to help with translation

<!-- This is left-side text 17-->
# [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/2020-03-27?d=tree,map&f_region=Oceania&p=grid&r=country&c=country&legend=closed)

### Navigation
* [Executive summary](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=1).
* [Background resources](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-26?n=2).     
* [About this data](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=3).  
* [Updates for Europe](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=4).  
* [Updates for North America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=6).  
* [Updates for Central & South America](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=10).  
* [Updates for Asia](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=12).  
* [Updates for Africa](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=14).  
* [Updates for Oceania](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=16).  
* [What you can do](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=18).  
* [Scientific credit](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-27?n=19).  

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Remove TOC to help with translation
